

This a model from the article:  
**Inclusion of the glucocorticoid receptor in a hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis model reveals bistability.**   
Gupta S, Aslakson E, Gurbaxani BM, Vernon SD. _Theor Biol Med Model_ 2007 Feb
14;4:8 [17300722](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17300722) ,  
**Abstract:**   
BACKGROUND: The body's primary stress management system is the hypothalamic
pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis. The HPA axis responds to physical and mental
challenge to maintain homeostasis in part by controlling the body's cortisol
level. Dysregulation of the HPA axis is implicated in numerous stress-related
diseases. RESULTS: We developed a structured model of the HPA axis that
includes the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). This model incorporates nonlinear
kinetics of pituitary GR synthesis. The nonlinear effect arises from the fact
that GR homodimerizes after cortisol activation and induces its own synthesis
in the pituitary. This homodimerization makes possible two stable steady
states (low and high) and one unstable state of cortisol production resulting
in bistability of the HPA axis. In this model, low GR concentration represents
the normal steady state, and high GR concentration represents a dysregulated
steady state. A short stress in the normal steady state produces a small
perturbation in the GR concentration that quickly returns to normal levels.
Long, repeated stress produces persistent and high GR concentration that does
not return to baseline forcing the HPA axis to an alternate steady state. One
consequence of increased steady state GR is reduced steady state cortisol,
which has been observed in some stress related disorders such as Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome (CFS). CONCLUSION: Inclusion of pituitary GR expression
resulted in a biologically plausible model of HPA axis bistability and
hypocortisolism. High GR concentration enhanced cortisol negative feedback on
the hypothalamus and forced the HPA axis into an alternative, low cortisol
state. This model can be used to explore mechanisms underlying disorders of
the HPA axis.

This model was taken from the [CellML
repository](http://www.cellml.org/models) and automatically converted to SBML.  
The original model was: [ **Gupta S, Aslakson E, Gurbaxani BM, Vernon SD.
(2007) - version=1.0**
](http://models.cellml.org/exposure/439daf2bc3bfca6893349b820c5d85d3)  
The original CellML model was created by:  
**Catherine Lloyd**   
c.lloyd@auckland.ac.nz  
The University of Auckland  

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

In summary, you are entitled to use this encoded model in absolutely any
manner you deem suitable, verbatim, or with modification, alone or embedded it
in a larger context, redistribute it, commercially or not, in a restricted way
or not..  
  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)

